---
layout: default
parent: Part 1: OpenRefine Basics with Personal Consumption Expeditures Data
has_children: true
nav_order: 6
title: Advanced facets
---

## Explore more advanced uses of facets1. **Work with numeric facets:** From the new Per\_capita_expenditure column pull down menu, choose Facet -> Numeric facet. Numeric facets provide a sliding scale where you can choose which values to include. Notice the blue areas indicate where the values fall – you can see where the bulk of your values lie, and where there are some outliers. Let’s try to remove the outliers by dragging the handles so the facet includes only the largest block of blue values. This removes a number of rows from the display.2. **Clean up non-numeric cells:** At the bottom of the numeric facet, there are options to show Non-numeric values, Blanks, or Errors in this column. There are no blanks or errors in this data column, but there are non-numeric values. Uncheck Numeric to look only at the Non-numeric values. Most of these have values of “F” in them, but some of them are actually blank! Why are they included here rather than counted as blank cells by the facet? Hover your cursor over a blank cell and click Edit. There are spaces in this cell – remove them using Edit cells -> Common transforms -> Trim leading and trailing white space. Notice in the facet that there are now a number of cells recognized as blank. **Note: In OpenRefine, any actions you perform are only applied to the rows currently selected**, i.e., the above task was only applied to the non-numeric cells that are currently selected.3. **Use facets to edit data in bulk:** What does the “F” value mean? This was included in the information at the top of the original spreadsheet, which we removed when we loaded it into OpenRefine. If you were to go back and look at the Excel file you’ll see that “F” means the data was too unreliable to be published. If you wanted to change the value of “F” to be something more descriptive, you can use facets to edit data in bulk. However, we can’t do it from a numeric facet, we need a text facet instead. From the Per\_capita_expenditure column pull down menu, select Facet -> Text facet. Notice that only the non-numeric values are listed – this is because you still have only non-numeric values selected (via the numeric facet). Hover your cursor over the value F and choose edit. Change F to something more descriptive, such as Not published. Click Apply. All values of F in the dataset are automatically changed to Not published.
> **In summary: filters are for free text searching; you can identify all matches of your search string in the column. Facets are for structured viewing and editing of unique values.**